So in this video we're gonna talk about
the continue, break, and also else.
Which I know we have talked
about a little bit in the past.
Talk about these three key words.
Now when you're actually coding, sometimes
you may need to interrupt the normal
flow of a loop to either
jump out of it completely or
to stop the current iteration and
move on to the next.
Now once again in this example,
gonna actually show you how to do that,
we're going to use a list even
though we haven't actually
covered what lists are yet.
So hopefully you can see that we're just
using them as a sequences of strings.
But don't worry cuz we're gonna be
taking a good look at what lists are in
a later video.
Let's just type up a little
bit of code to get started.
I'm gonna type, shopping.
List equals: milk,
pasta, eggs, spam, bread, rice.
That's the list of strings effects,
as you can see there and
we can do something like four item.
You've seen this before
in shopping lists colon,
print by plus item.
And you've probably seen similar code to,
we have seen similar code to this if we
actually run it we get going through each
item in the list and actually printing out
the word Buy + whatever the item is in
the list over here on the right hand side.
Now that's simple enough but in true
Monty Python fashion we don't like spam.
So, we could check for
the current item not being spam and
before actually printing the reminder.
But, in the loop with a lot of processing
it can often be preferable to skip
the item we don't want.
So, this is what continuants do.
So, what we can do is actually
put an If Test in there.
So, we can come in here and
we can put if item.
Is ==, two equal signs because we're
trying to compare to see whether or
not in simple, it is equal or
not as opposed to an assignment operator.
So if it = 'spam': you type continue,
getting our indent levels correct.
In other words, we're just going
to leave the print in there.
So you can see what should happen.
Going through the list,
if it finds an item with the name of spam,
it's gonna continue.
And we'll see what that does shortly.
But failing that,
it's actually just gonna print out
the items as it was doing before.
So now if I actually run this,
you can see that
we've still got all the output we
had before, but one thing's missing.
You can see what happened was spam
is now missing from the list.
So what happens is continue actually stops
processing any more lines in the block and
forces the for loop to move on to
the next value in the sequence.
So in other words,
what happened was I got to spam,
realized that there was a match there so
it looked at that line.
When it found that it wasn't
equal to spam, continue.
Effectively bypassed this altogether, so
I didn't actually process line six, and
went back to line two and
moved on to the next line.
So you can see there we were at eggs.
We were at eggs which is the item before
spam, and we conveniently bypass that and
went straight on to bread.
So that's what continue does, it actually
bypasses, or actually stops processing for
that particular block of code and
forces the for
loop again to move on to
the next value in the sequence.
And again it's very important just to note
which I'm going to harp on throughout this
course.
Be very careful with your
indenting here as always.
The code print is indented to
be at the same level as If so
it's not part of the block
code control base.
So again, if we move this over here,
we gonna get a different result.
In this case,
we're getting no output at all,
which is probably very confusing for you.
So, make sure in the same level cause
what we wanna do is you want to print
basically each iteration of the loop and
it's only if hits continue that
we actually go back to that item.
And just as at an aside we could have
done something like this, we could have
actually printed a message here to say,
print I'm ignoring, plus item.
And cuz it's at the same intent level,
if we run that buy milk, buy pasta,
buy eggs, I'm ignoring spam,
buy bread, buy rice.
So, you can see we could have actually
added that indent level if we wanted to.
Now, a similar statement
to continue is the break.
So it's possible to break out of a for
loop completely using the break command.
So if we actually replace continue with
break, we're not gonna remind it to buy
bread or rice because the loops gonna
terminate when it gets to spam.
So let's just see the difference there.
So we just from this again
without my extra print line,
as you can see we've got the five
items there with no spam.
But if we change break, I'm sorry, change
continue to break like so if you run it.
You can see the result
we've actually got there.
So we've actually got nothing after eggs.
So as soon as it hits spam, it was
a match to that and the break, then,
actually avoided, actually
processing anything else altogether.
So it's probably not
what we wanna do here.
But it's just a different way of doing it,
whereas continue will actually miss just
that counter item, break is essentially
going to miss out on all the rest and
actually exit out of the for loop, and
not do any further processing at all.
So in this particular case,
it's probably not what we want to do here.
Because if we're ordering a meal,
we wanted something without spam,
we could search the list for an item.
That would be another way of doing it.
And obviously we want to
stop looking if we found it.
So let's just go through and
type in that example.
I'm gonna leave that first example as it
is, but I'll actually comment it out.
So, let's do another scenario.
So that's meal = ["egg", "Bacon",
"spam", "sausages"] like so.
We can put for item in meal.
And you've seen that before
processing going through a list.
And if item == 'spam' :,
two equal signs again.
Then what we could do is we could
put nasty food_item = item.
And break.
Then we can come back here and
put if nasty_food_item print,
Can't I have anything without spam in it?
So if we actually run that.
Can't have anything without spam in it and
that's because we actually
found spam in the list.
So in that particular example we
could allow the loop to run through
all the items and it would still work.
And we comment at the break
line to confirm that.
So if we actually commented that out.
We do get exactly the same result,
but in this case,
it's not actually breaking
out of the loop this time.
Nasically it's a good idea to do that.
So again if you had something with
search with thousands of records here.
So let's just say this entry for me was
thousands of items, we could actually go
through and finish it and go right
through the entire loop without breaking.
So in other words it would match the first
item, then continue processing the rest.
But in this case it's smart to use break.
Because what we're doing is as soon
as we find the first match for
the word spam we're immediately
exiting the for loop, and
we're not doing any further processing.
So, again, we're being smart with the
utilization of hardware of our computer,
and not processing any more
than we actually need to.
So, breaks for very useful in situations
like that where we wanna terminate a loop
earlier, when early when
some condition is met.
Now with that said, there's a serious
actual problem with the program above.
Now did you actually spot that?
See if you can't spot that without
actually running the program again.
And the hint to look for is what would
happen if there's no spam in the list.
So did you spot it?
What if you remove span from the list
you're actually gonna get an error.
So let's just do that,
we'll call that "tomato" and
run it we actually get an error.
And you can see the error is
nasty_food_item is not defined.
And the error that it's crashing
on is actually line 15 when trying
to do this test here.
And if we actually have a look we
should be able to see line 15,
it says line 15 over here.
So it's crashing because we didn't
find an item with the name spam.
Nasty_food_item was never set to a value.
So at first glance, if looking at it,
you might think that you can rewrite this
line and change something like this.
See if nasty_food_item is equal to spam.
But that might help.
But it doesn't actually make any
difference in the scheme of things,
because nasty_food_item
has never been defined
because ultimately spam was
never found in the list here.
Now if you actually look carefully in
Intelli J it's a little bit harder
to see on my screen, but
it should be a little bit easier for you.
At the far right of line 15,
and actually hovering over,
if you hover over it
you can see a warning.
And if you actually just hover
over there and have a look,
name nasty_food_item cannot be defined.
So unless you get a green tick at the top
right hand corner out of your current
editing window in IntelliJ it's likely
there's a problem in your code somewhere.
And it's actually a good idea to
investigate every one of those warnings to
see what they are.
And ideally, you should be able to resolve
pretty well all of them before you
actually run your code because they're
there as a warning to tell you that
probably what you've
done is you've created.
So you made a mistake in your source code
somewhere and it may not be enough of
a mistake to have caused an error
to actually highlighting an error.
It may not crash your program but it is
actually IntelliJ's way to come back to
you to say that this is
something you need to relook at.
So how do we go ahead and
actually cure this problem?
So, the cure here is to make sure that
we initialize our variables to a value
before we start the loop.
Cuz what you can see is in
here nasty_food_item is at
only ever initialized for the first time
when we're actually in that loop, and
in this case if we actually
find the item is spam.
So what we actually should have done
is actually initialized this up here.
So just under meal,
we could put nasty_food_item, and
put two quotes there to initialize it for
the first time.
And then we should find that this
is actually gonna work for us.
And the reason it's gonna work
is because no matter what,
nasty_food__item has now been
initialized on line ten.
So, if we run this and
we get no output and the reason we get no
output at the moment is because remember I
changed spam to tomato but
notice there's no errors anymore.
And if we put our little cursor over
here we've got four weak warnings but
no major warning here.
So that's a sign that everything's okay.
And you can see some of the warnings
are quite minor, like a saying, so
hover over this one on line 7a,
no uline at the end of file.
Missing watt space after comma.
So what it's actually saying there is it
really wants us to actually put a space
there for those.
And notice how that disappeared
when I actually did that.
So it does actually make sense to
actually read these warnings and
see if you can actually resolve them.
So now what that probably wants
us is to press enter like that.
And notice how added one extra
blank blank line at the end and
that actually made it happy.
So again, pay attention to the warnings
that IntelligJ's popping up for
you, cuz they're normally there for
a reason.
They're there to guide you and
ultimately to make you a better
programmer by helping you find common
errors that are actually, programmers
actually put into their code by mistake.
Okay, so we looked at break and
continue and
we've actually seen else when we
looked at testing conditions using if.
But we can also use else at the end of
loops and probably the way that it's
been defined, it's an unfortunate word
to use else for what it does with loops.
Because its use doesn't really
imply otherwise in any sense.
What it does,
it causes a block to be executed if the
loop was allowed to continue to the end.
In other words,
if the loop was not broken out of.
We can demonstrate that again and just
before I do that, just to confirm that
this code was going to work, I'll change
that back to spam and we'll run it again.
Can't have anything without spam in it so
I can say that did work.
I want you to also pay attention
to the little green arrow in
the top right-hand corner, now.
We actually fixed all those errors up and
there's now no problems found.
So, in an ideal world, what you'll wanna
do is every time you're creating a program
you should be able to see that little
green tick there to indicate that
as far as IntelliJ's concerned,
a lot of the basic errors that crop up
have been addressed and
you've actually fixed those.
Still not guaranteed the program won't
crash, but chances are you've identified
a lot of those common faults
that we fixed up in this video.
So, let's go ahead and
actually look to see how the else works.
And as I said, else works for
the for loop in this case.
So, we can type in else,
we can actually put it here.
Print all.
I'll have a plate of that then please.
We can leave everything else as it was,
and if we actually run it, But
one problem actually still remains when we
do that is that we don't end up ordering
the meal if it doesn't contain spam.
So we know the meal is spam-free if the
loop is not broken out of which is exactly
the situation that
the else was designed for.
So now if we change spam to say beans.
Like so, and we actually run it again.
I'll have a plate of that then please,
and I'll actually fix my typo.
So, I can say the else
is only going to work
if the if was never actually executed.
In other words, if we actually
never broke out of the code.
If we leave spam in, the loop does break,
and the else block is ignored.
So you can see what's happening there.
So, again if I go back,
make that spam again.
The else block isn't executed because
we did actually break out of the code.
So that's what the else is there for,
and as I said,
it's probably not the best name.
Probably a bit of
an unfortunate word to use for
that because its use doesn't really
imply otherwise in any sense.
So again what it does,
it causes the block to be executed
if the loop was allowed to continue to the
end, in other words, there was no break.
And again, as always be very
careful with your indentations,
particularly tricky here is that else can
follow both an if and a for statement so
you can quite easily put an else there.
And actually got a completely different
result because the else is now
attached to the if,
as opposed to attaching it to the for.
So really do make sure you spend some
time early on getting your indentation
levels correct or you'll actually have
all sorts of weird problems happening and
you'll be wondering why.
And very common there when you're starting
out with parsing you have these sorts of
errors, which are basically to
do with indentation levels.
And incidentally if we
leave that beans in there,
the else could be a good actual place to
actually initialize our nasty_food_item.
So I could have actually
initialized it at that point.
And that will now work and the reason for
that is the else here was only going to
be called if we haven't broken out of it.
And a break here is actually only breaking
because we're actually looking for
the word spam.
So if we run this, that's another
way of actually doing it as well.
So that basically ensures that
the variables, that are fine for
the loop if the loop terminates
normally without a break.
Now whichever is better is
probably personal preference.
My background's been weaned on languages
like Pascal where everything has
to be declared before it's used.
So for
that reason I would normally recommend
you actually put the code up here.
So you'd initialize it at the top so
it's clearer.
And I think a lot of programs will
probably look for that as well.
But again it is a feature of Python if you
want to you can actually define it in that
else method as well.
There will certainly be plenty of
people who would argue with this and
say that it should actually
be done in the else.
One thing I would say, that once you've
actually decided on which way you're gonna
do things, be consistent and
do it the same way every time.
That's not only gonna help you when
you revisit your current months later.
But it's also gonna help other people who
read and maintain the code you've written.
Another thing I wanna point out
that the actual variable name,
nasty_food_item isn't consistent with
the names that we've used in the past.
We've actually named our variables
with what's called camel case.
And that's something like
nasty_food_item is not like that,
we would have done something like this,
nastyFoodItem.
So starting with the lower case for
the first word and
then each subsequent word we capitalize
it and that's called camel case.
We could have done it that way but
i wanted to show you that there's
different conventions for
variable names in Python.
Now languages like Java and C have very
clear preferences that most people adopt.
But Python doesn't really have a firm
convention to follow in this respect, so
there's no sort of one way of doing it.
There's no sort of common scenario that
says you should write your code this way.
So again whichever way you prefer to do
it, whether you want to write a creative
variable with words like
separated by underscores or
you want to use camel case which is the
word first word being lower case then each
word after that capitalized with a letter
to help separating the actual words.
The thing here would be to actually be
consistent again and you've come from
languages like Java and C it's probably
a good idea just to follow the same
conventions just to make sure that if
you are going back to those languages,
you know that should bring,
at least, your habits back to them.
But again, completely personal preference,
whichever way you prefer it,
it's up to you.
Again, I can't stress enough that
make sure you're actually consistent.
So we're gonna be consistent
within individual video topics,
but we're gonna actually use both styles
just so you get used to them both.
Just another reminder also before
I end this video is that Python
variables are case sensitive.
So in other words, nastyFoodItem
is actually different to nasty_food_item
on the first time with the lower case n.
Two entirely different variables.
All right, so
I'm just gonna delete that code there and
we're going to end the video here now.
In the next video we're actually going
to look at Augmented Assignment, and
I know that sounds like a mouthful, but
you'll be finding out what that is and
how to use it in the next video.